Now inspect the artifact itself.
Begin with goal fit.
Restate the decision or outcome in one sentence, then ask whether every major section contributes to it.
A polished detour is still a detour.
Next, inspect gaps.
What information did the AI not have?
Which assumptions were inferred from generic patterns?
What stakeholder, timeframe, region, dataset, dependency, or constraint could change the result?
Make the missing context a visible list.
Then inspect grounds.
For factual claims, open the source and check relevance, date, method, and wording.
For recommendations, separate evidence from interpretation.
For calculations, reproduce the key numbers.
For code, trace the risky path instead of trusting the demo.
After that, exercise the output.
Run the code.
Try the workflow with an edge case.
Compare the summary against the source.
Ask a colleague from the affected team to review the draft.
Evaluation that happens outside the chat is still part of AI fluency, even though the study could not observe it.
Finally, inspect consequences.
The report measured only eleven of twenty four framework behaviors because responsibility, disclosure, and downstream use often happen outside the interface.
Someone must still decide whether the result is safe, appropriate, and ready to release.
The review depth should match the stakes.
A brainstorming sketch may need a quick gap check.
A customer promise, financial model, production change, or legal analysis needs traceable evidence, real tests, and a named human owner.
First, confirm that the artifact serves the actual goal and constraints.
Second, verify missing context, evidence, calculations, and behavior through appropriate tests.
Third, match review depth to stakes and keep a named human owner.